[Substrate.io Migration] Tutorials -> Build a Blockchain -> Build a Local Blockchain (#14)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain.md

The node template provides a pre-configured, functional single-node blockchain you can run in your local development environment. It includes several key components, such as user accounts and account balances.

These predefined elements allow you to experiment with common blockchain operations without requiring initial template modifications.
In this tutorial, you will:

- Build and start a local blockchain node using the node template
- Explore how to use a front-end interface to:
    - View information about blockchain activity
    - Submit a transaction

By the end of this tutorial, you'll have a working local solochain and understand how to interact with it, setting the foundation for further customization and development.

## Prerequisites

To get started with the node template, you'll need to have the following set up on your development machine first:

> - Rust Installation - the node template is written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank}, so you'll need to have it installed and configured on your system. Refer to the [Installation]() section for step-by-step instructions on setting up your development environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Rust Installation - the node template is written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank}, so you'll need to have it installed and configured on your system. Refer to the [Installation]() section for step-by-step instructions on setting up your development environment
```
```suggestion
- Rust installation - the node template is written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank}, so you'll need to have it installed and configured on your system. Refer to the [Installation]() section for step-by-step instructions on setting up your development environment
```

Oops, I made a comment and then resolved it haha so here is another comment, because this still needs to be done 😬

---
title: Build a Local Solochain

> description: Learn to compile and launch a local blockchain node using Polkadot-SDK. Build, run, and interact with a pre-configured node template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn to compile and launch a local blockchain node using Polkadot SDK. Build, run, and interact with a pre-configured node template.
```

Please check the rest of the PR to remove the hyphen from Polkadot-SDK

---

# Build a Local Solochain

## Introduction

> [Polkadot-SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk){target=\_blank} offers a versatile and extensible blockchain development framework, enabling you to create custom blockchains tailored to your specific application or business requirements. This tutorial guides you through compiling and launching a single local blockchain node using the [Polkadot-SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: I'd like to see a bit of an explanation of solochains and why someone would want to build a solochain. I know solochain is pretty self-explanatory, but this is on the Polkadot docs where the main premise of the chains in Polkadot is that they're interconnected, so I would like to see it explicitly mentioned that this chain is not a parachain and it is not connected to a relay chain or other parachains

Reviewer 2: This is a good idea  - but maybe does not belong here, but rather in some introductory / index page

Reviewer: I don't know how much content we would have to describe what a solo chain is. I wasn't thinking it would be anything long. I'd really just like to see one sentence here or maybe alter the last sentence to be something like

"In this tutorial, you’ll compile and launch a single local blockchain node using the [Polkadot SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=_blank}, giving you a fully functional chain that operates independently, without being connected to a relay chain or parachain."

The node template provides a pre-configured, functional single-node blockchain you can run in your local development environment. It includes several key components, such as user accounts and account balances.

These predefined elements allow you to experiment with common blockchain operations without requiring initial template modifications.
In this tutorial, you will:

- Build and start a local blockchain node using the node template
- Explore how to use a front-end interface to:
    - View information about blockchain activity
    - Submit a transaction

By the end of this tutorial, you'll have a working local solochain and understand how to interact with it, setting the foundation for further customization and development.

## Prerequisites

> To get started with the node template, you'll need to have a few things set up on your development machine first:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started with the node template, you'll need to have the following set up on your development machine first:
```

Just to avoid few since there is only one item listed

> - Rust Installation - the node template is written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank}, so you'll need to have it installed and configured on your system. Refer to the [Installation]() section for step-by-step instructions on setting up your development environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Rust installation** - the node template is written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank}, so you'll need to have it installed and configured on your system. Refer to the [Installation]() section for step-by-step instructions on setting up your development environment
```

Reviewer: I'm assuming installation is another page that we're porting over?

Reviewer 2: Yes, see: https://github.com/polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs/pull/24

1. Clone the node template repository:
    ```bash
    git clone -b {{dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.version}} {{dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.repository_url}}
    ```

    !!!note
        This tutorial uses version `{{dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.version}}` of the Polkadot SDK Solochain Template. Make sure you're using the correct version to match these instructions.

2. Navigate to the root of the node template directory:
    ```bash
    cd polkadot-sdk-solochain-template
    ```

3. Compile the node template:
    ```bash
    cargo build --release
    ```

    !!!note
        Initial compilation may take several minutes, depending on your machine specifications. Always use the `--release` flag to build optimized, production-ready artifacts.

4. Upon successful compilation, you should see output similar to:
    <div id="termynal" data-termynal>
        <span data-ty="input"><span class="file-path"></span>cargo build --release</span>
	<span data-ty>Compiling solochain-template-node</span>
	<span data-ty>Finished `release` profile [optimized] target(s) in 27.12s</span>

>     </div>

Reviewer: Move this to be a snippet

## Start the Local Node

After successfully compiling your node, you can run it and produce blocks. This process will start your local blockchain and allow you to interact. Follow these steps to launch your node in development mode:

1. In the terminal where you compiled your node, start it in development mode:
    ```bash
    ./target/release/solochain-template-node --dev
    ```

>     The `--dev` option:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The `--dev` option does the following:
```

# Build a Local Blockchain

## Introduction

> [Polkadot-SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk){target=\_blank} offers a versatile and extensible blockchain development framework, enabling you to create custom blockchain nodes tailored to your specific application or business requirements. This tutorial guides you through the process of compiling and launching a single local blockchain node using the [Polkadot-SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Polkadot-SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk){target=\_blank} offers a versatile and extensible blockchain development framework, enabling you to create custom blockchain nodes tailored to your specific application or business requirements. This tutorial guides you through compiling and launching a single local blockchain node using the [Polkadot-SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank}.
```

> The node template provides a pre-configured, functional single-node blockchain that you can run in your local development environment. It includes several key components, such as user accounts and account balances.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The node template provides a pre-configured, functional single-node blockchain you can run in your local development environment. It includes several key components, such as user accounts and account balances.
```

> These pre-defined elements allow you to experiment with common blockchain operations without requiring any initial modifications to the template.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These pre-defined elements allow you to experiment with common blockchain operations without requiring initial template modifications.
```

In this tutorial, you will:

- Build and start a local blockchain node using the node template
- Explore how to use a front-end interface to:

>     - View information about blockchain activity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - View information about blockchain activity
```

    - Submit a transaction

By the end of this tutorial, you'll have a working local blockchain and understand how to interact with it, setting the foundation for further customization and development.

## Prerequisites

To get started with the node template, you'll need to have a few things set up on your development machine first:

- Rust Installation - the node template is written in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/){target=\_blank}, so you'll need to have it installed and configured on your system. Refer to the [Installation]() section for step-by-step instructions on setting up your development environment

## Compile a Node 

The [Polkadot-SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank} provides a ready-to-use development environment for building using the [Polkadot-SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk){target=\_blank}. Follow these steps to compile the node:

1. Open a terminal on your computer

> 2. Clone the node template repository:

Reviewer 3: I believe that these two can be merged into one single step, like:

"In your terminal, clone the node template repository"

(Or even more directly, "clone the node template repository" and that's it)

    ```bash
    git clone -b {{dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.version}} {{dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.repository_url}}
    ```

    !!!note
        This tutorial uses version `{{dependencies.polkadot_sdk_solochain_template.version}}` of the Polkadot SDK Solochain Template. Make sure you're using the correct version to match these instructions.

3. Navigate to the root of the node template directory:
    ```bash
    cd polkadot-sdk-solochain-template
    ```

4. Compile the node template:
    ```bash
    cargo build --release
    ```

    !!!note

>         Always use the `--release` flag to build optimized artifacts. The initial compilation may take several minutes to complete.

Reviewer 3: "The initial compilation may take several minutes, depending on your machine specifications."

I'd suggest that it looks a bit clearer

5. Upon successful compilation, you should see output similar to:

>     <div id="termynal" data-termynal>
>     <span data-ty="input"><span class="file-path"></span>cargo build --release</span>
> 	<span data-ty>Compiling solochain-template-node</span>
> 	<span data-ty>Finished `release` profile [optimized] target(s) in 27.12s</span>
> </div>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    <div id="termynal" data-termynal>
        <span data-ty="input"><span class="file-path"></span>cargo build --release</span>
	<span data-ty>Compiling solochain-template-node</span>
	<span data-ty>Finished `release` profile [optimized] target(s) in 27.12s</span>
    </div>
```

## Start the Local Node

> After successfully compiling your node, you're ready to run it and begin producing blocks. This process will start your local blockchain and allow you to interact with it. Follow these steps to launch your node in development mode:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After successfully compiling your node, you can run it and produce blocks. This process will start your local blockchain and allow you to interact. Follow these steps to launch your node in development mode:
```

        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:42 💻 CPU architecture: aarch64</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:42 📦 Highest known block at #0</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:42 〽️ Prometheus exporter started at 127.0.0.1:9615</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:42 Running JSON-RPC server: addr=127.0.0.1:9944, allowed origins=["*"]</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:47 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x0eef…935d), finalized #0 (0x0eef…935d), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:48 🙌 Starting consensus session on top of parent 0x0eef4a08ef90cc04d01864514dc5cb2bd822314309b770b49b0177f920ed935d (#0)</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:48 🎁 Prepared block for proposing at 1 (1 ms) [hash: 0xc14630b76907550bef9037dcbfafa2b25c8dc763495f30d9e36ad4b93b673b36; parent_hash: 0x0eef…935d; extrinsics (1): [0xbcd8…5132]</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:48 🔖 Pre-sealed block for proposal at 1. Hash now 0xcb3d2f28bc73807dac5cf19fcfb2ac6d7e922756da9d41ca0c9dadbd0e45265b, previously 0xc14630b76907550bef9037dcbfafa2b25c8dc763495f30d9e36ad4b93b673b36.</span>

>         <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:48 🏆 Imported #1 (0x0eef…935d → 0xcb3d…265b)</span>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:48 🏆 Imported #1 (0x0eef…935d → 0xcb3d…265b)</span>
        <span data-ty>...</span>
```

    </div>

> 3. Confirm that your blockchain is producing new blocks by checking if the number after **finalized** is increasing

Reviewer 3: As this is a terminal output, I'm unsure if we should use **finalized** or `finalized`

Author: Not sure about this

Reviewer 2: I would say `finalized`

    <div id='termynal' data-termynal>
        <span data-ty>...</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:47 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #0 (0x0eef…935d), finalized #0 (0x0eef…935d), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0</span>
        <span data-ty>...</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:52 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #1 (0xcb3d…265b), finalized #0 (0x0eef…935d), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0</span>
        <span data-ty>...</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:32:57 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #2 (0x16d7…083f), finalized #0 (0x0eef…935d), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0</span>
        <span data-ty>...</span>
        <span data-ty>2024-09-09 08:33:02 💤 Idle (0 peers), best: #3 (0xe6a4…2cc4), finalized #1 (0xcb3d…265b), ⬇ 0 ⬆ 0</span>
        <span data-ty>...</span>
    </div>

    !!!note
        The details of the log output will be explored in a later tutorial. For now, it's sufficient to know that your node is running and producing blocks.

## Interact with the Node

When running the template node, it's accessible by default at:

```bash
ws://localhost:9944

> ```

Reviewer 3: I'd add a small note here, just saying that those values can be modified if needed with the 
--listen-addr <listen-address>...
--rpc-port

Reference: https://docs.substrate.io/reference/command-line-tools/node-template/

<br class="Apple-interchange-newline">

To interact with your node using the [Polkadot.js Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/explorer){target=\_blank} interface, follow these steps:

1. Open [Polkadot.js Apps](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/explorer){target=\_blank} in your web browser and click the network icon in the top left corner
    ![](/images/tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain-1.webp)

2. Connect to your local node:
    1. Scroll to the bottom and select **Development**
    2. Choose **Custom**
    3. Enter `ws://localhost:9944` in the input field
    4. Click the **Switch** button
    ![](/images/tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain-2.webp)

> 3. Verify Connection:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Verify connection:
```

    - Once connected, you should see **solochain-template-runtime** in the top left corner
    - The interface will display information about your local blockchain
    ![](/images/tutorials/polkadot-sdk/build-a-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain/build-a-local-blockchain-3.webp)

You are now connected to your local node and can interact with it through the Polkadot.js Apps interface. This interface allows you to explore blocks, make transactions, and interact with your blockchain's features.

> ## Transfer Funds

Reviewer 3: I'd remove this entire section since it will be covered by the polkadot js transfer guide

Author: Not sure about this one. I think it is important for the one who is following the tutorial to understand how to interact with it

Reviewer 2: If there is already going to be a transfer guide, or even other PJS guides, you can link it in a manner like: 

"Follow these tutorials to interact with your chain", and you can link specific ones, etc.

Author: Makes sense. These guides will stay in the Polkadot Wiki? Nico started migrating the Transfer guides but I think we stopped because they were 'end user' tutorials

Reviewer: Yeah, my suggestion is to link back to the existing page on the Wiki for now and add a comment on the line above or below the link like `<!-- TODO: Polkadot.js Apps guide -->` so we can easily find where we need to make updates once we need to make them

---
title: Build a Local Solochain
description: Learn to compile and launch a local blockchain node using Polkadot-SDK. Build, run, and interact with a pre-configured node template.
---

# Build a Local Solochain

## Introduction

> [Polkadot-SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk){target=\_blank} offers a versatile and extensible blockchain development framework, enabling you to create custom blockchain nodes tailored to your specific application or business requirements. This tutorial guides you through compiling and launching a single local blockchain node using the [Polkadot-SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Polkadot-SDK](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk){target=\_blank} offers a versatile and extensible blockchain development framework, enabling you to create custom blockchains tailored to your specific application or business requirements. This tutorial guides you through compiling and launching a single local blockchain node using the [Polkadot-SDK Solochain Template](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk-solochain-template){target=\_blank}.
```
